## Theses completed or in progress
#### In the Thesis information page of your application, provide the full title and summary of your most recent thesis completed. If you have not completed a thesis at the bachelor’s or master’s level, please provide the full title and summary of your in-progress thesis. If you are describing an in-progress thesis, include only work that has already been done; do not repeat the information provided in the Outline of proposed research section.

#### For CGRS D, describe your bachelor’s (honours) or master’s thesis in this section. If you did not complete a previous thesis, you may describe one of your major research projects or papers or you may describe the work done to date on your doctoral degree.

### Limit of 3250 characters
##How climate change will re-shape mixed temporate forest: evidence from experimental and observational data
Climate change is intensifying extreme weather events, posing significant challenges to urban and forest ecosystems. Rising temperatures, heat waves, and increasing wildfire frequency threaten biodiversity and human well-being. In urban environments, tree cover provides critical services that can help mitigate these threats. With my Master’s research, I aim to identify tree species best suited for warmer and drier conditions in British Columbia, optimizing urban tree planting strategies and reforestation efforts for climate resilience. For this, I conducted a two-year experiment on tree saplings and leveraged data from a common garden and a community science program in an urban arboretum.

#### My research questions are: 
How do extended manipulated spring and fall temperature seasons affect tree phenological phases across different species, both immediately (in the same year as the extended season) and in subsequent years? 
How phenological phases regulate mature and juvenile tree growth in urban ecosystems

### Chapter 1:
To investigate the impact of manipulated spring and fall temperatures on phenological responses, I successfully conducted experiments in 2024 across seven different tree species under controlled conditions, including species that span both fast and short-life strategies (e.g., Populus balsamifera) and slow growth and longer lifespan species (e.g., Quercus macrocarpa) and including both deciduous and evergreen species. I used a full factorial design of spring and fall warming with two levels each (control/ warmed), resulting in four treatments plus an additional two treatments to test fall nutrient effects, using 15 replicates each for a total of 630 individual trees. Throughout the growing season of 2024 and 2025, I tracked phenological events weekly from the start of the spring treatments through the end of the fall treatments. I am at the early stages of building a Bayesian hierarchical model to better tease out the effects of spring and/or fall warming on the following season's phenological phases.

### Chapter 2:
Recent research has shown that phenological traits are critical in regulating tree growth in urban ecosystems. Thus, my first chapter will be complemented by two smaller projects, leveraging the data from a common garden and community science program to investigate how the timing of phenological events affects growth across years for juvenile and mature deciduous trees within an urban arboretum.

I am complementing this large-scale experiment with two additional projects that occured at the Arnold Arboretum of Harvard University, that together will yield a broader perspective on the mechanisms driving tree phenology and its relation to growing season length and temperature. First, I will use five years of leaf phenology and tree cross-sections data that were collected in the common garden study to analyze how the tree ring width relates to leaf phenology and how these traits vary across years. Second, I will use 10 years of phenological data from the Treespotters community science program to test how season length affects growth in mature trees. I related these observations to growth by performing dendrochronological X phenology analysis of 50 individual trees of 11 species using another Bayesian hierarchical model. Preliminary results suggest a much greater response amplitude from the juvenile trees to growing season length than mature trees. This is in line with the litterature which suggests that young trees can more easily take advantage of extra days. These projects together have the potential to improve and guide urban forest planning in the face of fast-paced climate change.

#### *To add to main text*:
 In the upcoming fall 2025, after the trees have grown in ambient temperatures for the season, I will assess growth on the individual (total biomass) and the cellular level (number of cells and their characteristics), using dendrochronological methods.