Fleeting notes 2024

**Fleeting notes 2024**

https://besjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/1365-2745.13682

On growing season and senescence. Autumn warming delays senescence dates by up to 8 days/1 degree increase.

Keenan predicted that by each day of advance spring leaf out = uptake of 45kg carbon/ha. Predicited each day deleay in autumn senescent = uptake of 98kg/ha.

Piao found carbon losses in longer growing season.

Delayed leaf senescence doesn’t necessarily translate to elevated plant productivity. Warmer springs and summers can also lead to earlier growth cessation. 

**Ok**

Despite keeping their green colour, leaves reduce photosynthetic capacity after summer solstice. There is also the fact that in autumn, there is declining radiation. 

Plant photosynthesis is not only regulated by environemental cues. It’s also limited by feedbacks between sink (growth) and source activity (photosynthesis). Therefore, autumn productivity appears to be limited by plant’s carbon sink strength (e.g. nutrient limitation). **what if we don’t limit nutrient?

For biomass measurements, they waited until all plants were in full dormancy to prevent respiratory carbon losses

Doivent contacter le soutien technique de la SAAQ

**June 3**

**Pretransplant fertilization of containerized Picea mariana seedlings: calibration and bioassay growth response**

Hardening period: shortly after bud formation, overwintering tissues undergo a long hardening period that is perceived by shorter photoperiod and reinforced by cold temperature as they enter dormancy phase.

Nutrient build-up in seedlings can be high, but the carry-over effect of high fertilization on root-plug nutrient status into the hardening period is short lived, probably because of continued plant uptake and leaching. *** leaching : lessivage

**Concepts in empirical plant ecology**

The assumption that individuals are resource limited is misleading. It’s based on agronomic perception because it’s focused on biomass production, whereas ecological concept of limitation accounts for evolutionary fitness i.e. reproductive performance of a plant relative to its neighbours (conspecific individuals or other species). The term optimum is often ambivalent and doesn’t account for a community. E.g. in a semi-arid community, if there is more water, at first there won’t be new taxa, but after the transition period, new species assemblage and = change in community. 

Definition of stress:

Should not be defined as the absence of optimal growth conditions. If that was the definition, plants in the wild would be permanently stressed. Stress is best applied to situations in which plants experience severe constraints that drastically diminish their reproductive success so that they can become locally extinct. 

**June 6**

**Carbon Source Reduction Postpones Autumn Leaf Senescence in a Widespread Deciduous Tree**

They added NPK fertilizer in the form of balls. 2.15g and 0.55g of micro nutrients in 5.5 l pots

**Effect of climate warming on the timing of autumn leaf senescence reverses at the summer solstice**

The concentration of the soil mixture was N: 54g/m3, Phosphate: 140g/m3 and Potassium400g/m3

**June 25**

**A new process-based model for predicting autumn phenology: How is leaf senescence controlled by photoperiod and temperature coupling?**

They define the vegetation growing season as the leaf unfolding date in spring to the leaf colouration in autumn. These 2 phenomenons can act as a link between climate change and biogeochemical cycles. 

Growing season shifts may influence exchange capacities of carbon, water and energy among land surfaces and atmosphere = ecosystem productivity variations. This will in turn affect the global carbon balance and climate change. 

Changes in autumn leaf phenology in temperate forests can better explain variation in annual net ecosystem productivity (NEP) than spring phenology. Delayed autumn leaf senescence —> increased NEP.

**DONE**

There is a consensus that leaf senescence is controlled by photoperiod and temperature. As days shorten and temperature decreases, an abscission zone starts to form at the base of the petiole and chlorophyll degradation occurs. 

At latitudes where severe winters occurs, it seems like photoperiodic regulation is stronger than temperature whereas winters are less severe, temperature exerts a certain amount of control over autumn phenology. But we don’t know how much is split between photoperiod and temperature for many species. 

Precision: their study was conducted on the Qinghai-Tibetan plateau. 

Their results show that minimum temperature may trigger leaf-senescence through decreasing light-saturated photosynthetic rate( not sure what that means) and limiting merismetic activity in shoot

Definition of bud set: growth cessation. It’s independent of autumn senescence. Senescence cannot be initiated until a certain time after growth cessation. 

**Timing of photoperiodic competency causes phenological mismatch in balsam poplar (*Populus balsamifera* L.)**

https://onlinelibrary-wiley-com.proxy.bibliotheques.uqam.ca/doi/10.1111/j.1365-3040.2012.02560.x

Budset final date: 206 (July 24)

50% leaf yellowing : 270 (September 26)

#### **June 27**

**Acclimation of phenology relieves leaf longevity constraints in deciduous forests**

We have reliable models to predict SOC (Start of season) based on accumulated temperature and photoperiod. In contrast, long-term trends in autumn senescence are less clear, depend on end of season (EOS) definitions bases on senescence start, leaf discolouration stages or dormancy, and **drivers are not mwell understood.** 

Experiments showed warm autumns = delayed leaf senescence. However, long-term observations often don’t show an association between phenology and autumn warming. 

One study (cited in the article): found a strong relationship between observed EOS and simulated net carbon assimilation, such that greater productivity was associated with earlier leaf senescence (where does that leave me?). This negative relationship was interpreted as a plant response to C sink saturation whereby an early replenishment of non-structural carbon reserves induces an early cessation of teh photosynthetically active season. 

In that sense, EOS advancement is predicted as SOS is early and plant can saturate their non structural carbon reserves. 

**Phenotypic plasticity of leaves enhances water-stress tolerance and promotes hydraulic conductivity in a tall conifer**

On Segi.

They studied Segi’s anatomy at an elevation gradient. They hypothesized that the structure of foliage within crowns of tall sequoia varies in response to gradients of water/light availability. 

**Asymmetric effects of cooler and warmer winters on beech phenology last beyond spring**

Phenological response to temperature and photoperiod differs a lot among coexisting species. In that sense, climate change will likely affect the competition among species and shift their distribution. 

Spring leaf phenology has advanced by many days. However, warmer climate has a dual role that affects both dormancy release in winter and the initiation of bud development in spring. 

It’s reported that there is now more forcing requirements. That is the result of insufficient chillling requirement for full dormancy release.

Criticism from the authors: most studies focus on a single phenophase and therefore don’t consider the potential effect of one phenophase to the other phenophases occuring within the same growing season. Nor do they consider from one year to the next one i.e. the carryover effect. 

#### **3 September 2024**

**Plant Phenology and global climate change: Current progresses and challenges**

Climate change has greatly shifted major events. E.g. spring and autumn, but also caused phenological mismatch across trophic levels. This can have strong impacts on community structures and ecosystem functions. E.g. different phenological responses to warming between plants and animals can lead to bird species not breeding at the time when the food isn’t at it’s maximum supply. E.g. this can also cause teh reduction in seed production for some tree species. 

Changes in phenology that are caused by warming are also a primary cause for the recent increases in vegetation activity and carbon uptake

In the second paragraph of the first section of the methodology, they provide an. example of BBCH. It's a system that has provided a uniform definition of plant development stages. 

On remote sensing: the spatial resolution of satellite data varies from 30 m to several km. Therefore, the retrieval and interpretation of stands with mixed canopies where several species are present and different phenophases co-occur at the same time. 

2.4 Manipulative experiments

Using only phenology observations, it's very difficult to reveal the covarying drivers of phenology and  gain insights in the mechanisms that drive the patterns in the observations and changes. To understand more the mechanisms of plant phenology, manipulatve experiments have been proven to be a very useful tool. 

There are types of climate warming experiments : passive and active warming. Both show similar results: spring leafing is highly sensitive to manipulate warming. 

Downsides of manipulative experiments:

1. Most experiments are conducted for a handful of species adn usually have only lasted a few years. This short term may not suffice to induce adaptive responses or to gain complete understanding of long-term pheno responses of plants to environmental changes. 
   
   That's because other ecological processes may play an increasing role overtime. E.g. nutrient availability and thermal acclimation. 

2. Only conducted on seedlings or saplings and rarely on mature trees. Young and mature trees may show very different responses to the same environemental changes.

3. Phenological responses to experimental and natural conditions may differ a lot. 

They mention that despite these limitations, they have the advantage of keeping certain conditions constant, so they are ideal to answer hypothesis testing.  

Few studies have documented the phenological events in the fall. Evidence tend to point towards a delaying trend in the end date of autumn. Much weeker than in the spring though. 

*Thought: could that weeker trend be caused by the fact than autumn phenological events are not as "clear cut as the spring's?*

##### Drivers and mechanisms:

1. Temperature

Response of phenological events is largely non-linear. In autumn and early spring, cooling has a dual role. 1. chilling activates plant stress responses and stimulates plant endodormancy (first stage of plant dormancy). Then a certain amount of accumulated chilling is required to break endodormancy and lead plants into the second dormant stage (ecodormancy). During that stage, the growth of meristem cells is stimulated and plant cell elongation accelarates under warm temperature that is quantified as growing degree-days.

Spring phenology is more responsive to warming during daytime than to nightime temperature

2. Photoperiod

The increasing night length in autumn induces bud set and leaf senescence when photoperiod is bellow a growth-permitting treshold.

E.g. leaf senescence of mature European aspens is mostly regulated by  photoperiod (happens on the same day every year)

Photoperiod effect on spring phenology is unclear unlike its effect on fall phenology. 

With warming-induced leaf out advancement, reduced photperiod earlier in spring may decrease the temperature sensitivity of spring phenology and thus prevent the plants from leafing out too early = potential spring frost. 

Photoperiod sensitivity of spring phenological events might vary among species/latitudes. 

3. Nutrient and water availability

They can affect plant phenology, but their extend is <temperature and photoperiod. 

Nutrients can affect plant's phenology. E.g. enough nutrient during the GS may enhance the plant's resistance and adaptation to freezing stress, thus postponing autumn leaf senesence. 

Studies found that water availability may play a key role in spring and autumn events. Altough not enough empirical evidence. 

4. Interaction among phenological events

Recent studies found that spring and autumn phenology are positively intercorrelated. Underlying mechanisms might related to leaf traits stuch as leaf longetivity and programmed cell death. The interaction between spring and autumn phenology will likely modify pheno responses to climate change. 

##### Ecosystem and climatic impacts of pheno changes

Climate-induced phenology changes may reshape community structure, because of the diverse range of plant pheno responses to climate change. E.g. a study showed that species growing in a cool climate are more sensitive to warming climate then those in warm regions. Convergence of phenological events accross a temperature gradient could increase gene flow accross lat/long.

Impacts accross trophic levels: alter the interactions between plants and herbivores. 

Plant phenological shifts may alter soil moisture, run-off and precipitation primarily through influencing evapotranspiration.

Plant phenological changes can also produce extra biological forcing on surface temperature by directly modifying surface conductance and albedo (and indirectly modifying cloud formation). Earlier leaf out = larger amount of solar radiation absorption that heats the canopy surface. This mechanism is espacially important for snow-covered boreal regions due to the large contrast between snow albedo adn new-leaf albedo. 

##### Challenges

Currently, phenomodels use phenological records. Underlying mechanistic processes governing phenological events are rarely incorporated into models or only empirically represented via statistical relationships.

Inconsistencies of experimental settings see: chuine et al. 2010 and Hanninen 2016

### 12 September 2024

##### A continental phenologymodel for monitoring vegetation responses to interannual climatic variability

Trees need to fullfill a chilling requirement before warmer temperatures begin to affect spring time growth. 

In woody plants, short days induce dormancy or offset of greeness. The critical daylength varies with latitude.

Dry grasslands are sensitive to temperature, precipitation and soil moisture whereas grasslands in cooler, moister areas are mostly influenced by temperature. 

##### A Review of Vegetation Phenological Metrics Extraction Using Time-Series, Multispectral Satellite Data

**Permanent note: DONE**

Phenostages can be detected by: 

1. Human visual observations : pro:  a lot of data from a long time. Con: they represent only a small localized area and in often limited number. Provide detailed and accurate phenology information that is essential for remote calibration of sensing-based models.

2. Near surface measurements : include imagery acquired from convential visibble wavelength digital cameras  with RGB (Red, green and blue) bands, continuous carbon flux measurements and spectral reflectance sensors with multivand radiometer mounted on tripod, fence post, meteo tower or caried on aeral platform.
   
   1. Pro: provide higher temporal resolution and greater spatial coverage than visual observations . Can be used to analyze site-level pheno variations and mechanisms, train satellite remote sensing based pheno models. Bridge between human and satellite remote
      
      1. Digital cameras use the RGB based vegetation index (VI) to quantify canopy greenness. E.g. Phenocam network
   
   2. Con: usually limited in number and spatial coverage

3. Satellite remote sensing
   
   1. Pros: offer global coverage data. E.g. Lansat characterize the seasonality of vegetation at regional scales. 
   
   2. Cons: landsat imagery applications is limited because many pheno changes occur more rapidly than the 16-day revisit of lanset. Also cloud cover

### 16 September 2024

##### A Biologist's guide to Mathematical modelling

###### Chapter 1

1.3.1. Dynamics of HIV after initial infection

When a patient is infected by HIV, the number of virions in the bloodstream skyrockets and plummets again = acute phase. It lasts about 100 days. This rise reflects the infection of CD4+ cells and the replication of HIB within the infected host cells. Easy answer is that immune system acts to supress the infection. However, Phillips 96 found that the number of virions declines because most of the CD4+ cells have been infected and thus there are fewer host cells to infect. 

He came to the counterintuitive conclusion that the reduction in virus concentration during the acute infection doesn't reflect the ability of HIV-specific immune response to control the virus replication. What Philipps can say : an immune response is not necessary to explain the observed data. 

It illustres an important principle in modelling: principle of parsimony that states that you should prefer models containing few variables and parameters as possible to describe a system.

Things Philipps model succeded to do: 1. Changed the view of what was possible (in regards to CD4+ cells) 2. Produced testable predictions 3. generated a useful null hypothesis: viral dynamics do not reflect an immune response. 

1.4. Concluding Message

Models can only tell us what is possible. E.g. they can tell us how HIV levels within the body or HIV incidence within a population might change over time. But without data, mathematical models can nevert tell us what happened or what's happening. 

### 20 September 2024

##### An earlier start of the thermal growing season enhances tree growth in cold humid areas but not in dry areas

**Permanent note: DONE**

Start of the thermal growing season directly influences plant phenology 
and its advance matches the interannual variability of spring green-up. 
These phenoshifts influence the capacity of the biosphere to take up 
carbon and affect the exchange of energy between the atmosphere and the 
bioshere. We don't know if the shifts in plant phenology would result in
 a negative feedback to warming and a increased carbon uptake or 
alternatively, exhibit additional ecological stress.

In addition to earlier TSOS, peak photosynthesis occurs earlier and 
culminates higher in forests of the extratropical Northern Hemisphere

The carbon residence time in tree stems is much longer than in the 
foliage, making the former a major contributor to the long-term carbon 
sink in forests.

Tree radial growth represents the annual accumulation and fixation of carbohydrates in the stem

In addition to temperature, the length of the growing season determines the available period for developing functional xylem through cell maturation and lignification, especially in cold areas. 

In drier ecosystems, water availability is another important driver of cambial reactivation.

### 27 September 2024

##### Progress towards an interdisciplinary science of plant phenology: building predictions across space, time and species diversity

**Permanent note: YES***

Plant molecular ecology research have focused on phenology where studies
 were conducted to understand how underlying physiological and genetic 
structures that control flowering provide evolutionary insights into how
 local adaptation shapes intraspecific variation

To predict plant phenological responses, we need understanding of 
abiotic versus biotic forces that drive selection on plant phenology. 
This is grounded on the concept of temporal niche i.e. that time is a 
primary axis bby which plant species can partition ressources, from 
nutrients to pollinators. Both abiotic and biotic forces can shape 
selection on plant phenology.

They expect that most species even (those with phenologies shaped 
almost entirely by biotic forces) proximately trigger phenology through 
abiotic cues. E.g. Selection on flowering time for some species might be
 driven to match the timing of specialist pollinators, but 
physiologically, they use environmental cues such as temperature and 
photoperiod to cue flowering.

In temperate biomes, when precipitation is regular throughout the year, 
temperature is expected to be a major driver of phenology especially at 
the start and end of the growing season. However, when climate 
variability is low and competition between plants for soil, light and 
pollinator resources is high, biotic forces should dominate to shape 
selection.

In arid and semi-arid systems, moisture is a critical driver of phenology

In tropical regions, temperature, precipitation and irradiance may 
interact to drive phenology. Though, seperating proximate cues is hard.

Annual species are on average, more sensitive to temperature than 
perennial species and early ontogenic stages (e.g. seedlings) appear to 
be more responsive to temperature than adult stages).  This indicates 
that thre is a big tradeoff between investment/risk where individuals 
with lower investments appear more reponsive to temperature compared 
with individuals with more investment.

High risk, high reward: more responsive organisms are subjected to 
greater risks, but also benefits. They also tend to have increased 
abundance or fitness with warming.

Native species appear to be
 more senstitive to climate which suggests that responsive phenologies 
may be important to invasion success.

Closely related species show that related species are more likely to 
flower at similar times. However, there is mixed support fr phylogenetic
 structure of species response to climate. This means that species 
cannot be considered statistically independant and studies considering 
the timing of pheno events needs to consider their shared evoluttionary 
history and genetic background.

Molecular ecology shows a strong  genetic basis for phenology whether 
it's driven by high phenotypic plasticity in phenology across a species'
 range with little genetic variation or cues, such as photoperiod that 
produce a static timing across years within sites. This is an obstacle 
because it means that pheno data taken from field observations from 
field include mixed signals. E.g. observations at one location of a 
wide-ranging species that triggers flowering predominantely by 
temperature, may not accurately trigger the witing-species variation.

one solution is to use time-series data that allows modeling of plastic 
responses to interannual climate variation. Limitation: assumes that 
cues are not locally adapter across species' ranges and may introduce 
bias based on the local climate sampled.

### 4 October 2024

##### Progress towards an interdisciplinary science of plant phenology: building predictions across space, time and species diversity

**Permanent note: YES**

To build robust models, critical data is needed beyond temperature. Data on soil moisture, humidity, irradiance (diffuse and direct) are necessary for any basic estimates of how phenological cues may vary accross species and latitudes and habitats. However, climate factors are intrinsically linked (cloud cover, radiation, precipatation often covary). This makes them difficult to separate their effects.

To estimate how the intraspecific variation in phenology is controlled by phenotypic plasticity vs genotypic adaptation, we can do controlled studies on cues, if conducted across populations. --> links with cookie project

Common garden studies, where exotic species were planted in Europe have found variations over a month in flowering time across populations taken from latitudinal transects spanning 1200-1800km. 

##### Effects of climate change on alpine plants and their pollinators

**Permanent note: yes**

Alpine plant community are simple and comprised mostly of long-lived perrenial herbaceous plants and have a relatively low plant diversity. Trees are absent, but in some alpine areas, smaller shrub communities have been expanding and subalpine plants have been migrating up to the detriment of smaller shrubs. Therefore, one of the most important consequence of climate change is the reduction of alpine environements in result to the migration of trees and shrubs

The topographically complex (rough and patchy ) landscapes that characterize alpine ecosystems should be both more resistand and resilient to climate change, as they have greater microhabitat diversity compared to flat and homogeneous habitats.

Alpine plant communuties are relatively resistant to alien species invasion. This might be because of seed dispersal constraints, but also because of low temperature (slow growth), and biotic interactions. 

Snow melt also provides a major source of water at the beginning of the growing season. Now, more precipitation falls as rain rather than snow which might cause longer growing season and potentially increased summer drought. The warming of the ground is also a cue for plant growth

Flowering phenology: as snowmelyt dates are advancing, growing seasons are getting longer and flowering phenology is getting earlier. This is a major determinant for small plants in alpine environements as they can't start growing until the snow melts. In subalpine, few species may begin to grow before the snow is gone. 

#### Forest phenology and a warmer climate – growing season extension in relation to climatic provenance

**Permanent note: YES**

High temperature accelarates bud burst, flowering and stem elongation in spring, and thus extend the growing season. Optimal temperatures for metabolism, growth and phenological resposnes are the product of long-term adaptation to local conditions even when imperfectly matched with local climate. 

Global patterns of species distribution indicate that temperature sensitivity influences both the potential and realized niche of plants. However, a lot of factors combine to define range boundaries. Plants have adapted to their local environment so their growth and reproduction are optmized.

###### Methods:

Collection of leaf litter from the ground of each chamber at 5 to 18 days intervals. Separated by species and dried. 

Chlorophyll remaining in individual trees. based on a pre-selected subsample of leaves and supplemented by a random sampling of leaves chosen at intervasl throughout each crown. Fallen leaves were recorded as zero color. For populus, they couldn't make estimates as too much biotic damage. Foliar chlorophyll concentrations were estimated at similar intervals using a portable chlorophyll meter (SPAD-502, Konica Minolta Sensing, Inc., Osaka, Japan), a non-destructive method based on light absorption (optical density difference) at two wavelengths.

Unitless SPAD values were converted to chlorophyll concentrations using a calibration established from a subsample of leaves of each species. 

Warming experiments advanced bud burst in all species and years the experiments were conducted, even in species growing well outside of their native ranges. 

There is little concensus on the environmental cues for leaf colouring and abscission in autumn, partly because the pool of ground observations is much smaller and events are difficult to quantify. Observations of growth cessation, bud set, senescence, abscission adn cold-hardiness represent different aspects of "**autumn syndrome**" mediated through an array of signaling pathways. 

At larger scales, autumn observations may rely on ground or satellite based estimations of color change; absciussion dates may be based on light transmission through the canopy or leaf-litter collections, even through leaf fall can be induced prematurely by extreme temperatures, drought, insects or pathogens and may respond to a single episode of high wind, rain or frost. 

Question: when we monitor leaf senescence, what are we monitoring exactly? Could there be a single hormone treshold that could be a better indicator? 

Photoperiod is often accepted as a trigger of autumn phenology, potential warming at the end of the growing season is often ignored. Yet, inter-annual differents beg an explanation. Autumn temperatures were the primary cue for senescence in 2 Quercus species. Same for Fagus, but photoperiod played a role as well. 

In Populus, senescence was triggered by long nights, lower temperature accelarated chlorophyll degradation. On the other hand, senescence in Malus and Pyrus was induced by low temperature and insensitive to photoperiod. Their results showed delayed phenophases regardless of differences in photoperiod between source and field sites. Delays in leaf absission were more pronounced than delays in chlorophyll loss. 

There is evidence from model simulations and field observations that extended GS can increase productivity in forest ecosystems. E.g. an experience showed that small temperature-driven differences in growing season length had a large cumulative effect on annual C exchange. We indicates the importance of usiong a temperature-driven growing season length especially in spring. Longer growing season=higher productivity

### 10 October 2024

###### Growing season changes in the last century

**Permanent note: YES**

Studies (from that study published in 2006) have used 3 techniques to determine GSL change :

1. Phenology

2. Normalised vegetatioin index (NDVQ) from satellite data

3. Surface air temperature.

Since spring pheno events are closely related to temperature, they can act as proxies for spring temperatures. In autumn, it's not as clear, maybe because temporal changes in the autumn seem to be less pronounced and show more heterogeneous patterns.

They also point out a lower difference in autumn phenology compared to spring phenology

*A lot of very insighful informations about papers reporting phenology*

In the northem Atlantic region, a big portion of the climate variability is attributed to North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO) Using leafing dates of trees for 30 years, they showed that the growing season was early by 8 days. It is likely explained by NAO

### 11 October 2024

###### Warming experiments underpredict plant phenological responses to climate change

**Permanent note: YES**

There are two main approaches to predict plant responses to climate change:

1. Observations over time or space to quantify sensitivities to temperature variabilit and change. This includes recent warming. 

2. Experiments that directly warm natural plant communities on a small scale

Warming experiments have been used to extrapolate to future conditions. However, this approach rests on the critical but **little-tested** assumption that plant responses to experimental warming match long-term respones to global warming. Testing this assumption is essential if we want to assess the utility of warming experiments for long-term forecasting and prediction.

The analyses conducted for 36 species common to both study types, the experiments still produced smaller sensititivites. More strikingly, the experiments predicted a delay in flowering and little change in leafind in response to higher temperatures wheras the observations predicted an advance of >4.6 days per C for both leafinf and flowering.

Several artefacts may explain the lower sensitivity in the experimental studies. E.g.: 

- differences in the traits of the species sampled

- correlations between MAT and other envrionemental variables for the observational studies

- differences in the degree of warming

They didn't find aanything that these factors explain the smaller or positive senstitivitiues found in the experiment. 

Warming methods have continually improved, all experimental manipulations unavoidably alter additional environemental factors. E.g.:

- Common passive warming structures-open-top chambers- reduce light, wind and often soil moisture and reduce winter temperatures. 

- Above canopy heaters only achieve warming in periods of low wind. 

They found no evidence of differences in the senstivities between the passive and active designs. Canopy heaters seem to have caused the greatest advances.

There were no effects of habitat, study duration or period of warming each year: the results from studies tha manipulated temperature **only** during the growing season were indistintinguishable from thos that eleaveted temperature year around. That means that there are no difference between the 2. 

Both active and passive experimental designs tend to reduce total irradiance and soil moisture, which can delay plant phenology

The few efforts to examine temperature changes carefully have found that warming chambers can sometimes result in the cooling of plots or can have unintended effects on daily and seasonal temperature regimes. 

To project experimental results, we must first verify that they amtch the changes that are observed in natural systems. 

When sampling the same species, experiments failed to rpedict both the magnitude adn the direction of plant responses to warmin

These huge differences between observed and experimentally estimated temeprature sensitivities indicate that experimental results alone should not be used for parameterizing species distribution and exosystem models.

###### A globally coherent fingerprint of climate change impacts across natural systems

**Permanent note: YES**

An impass of how to assess the consequences of climate change on natural biological systems comes from differences in perspective on what constitutes an "important" factor. Anyone would consider a currently strong driver to be important. But biologists also attach importatn to forces that are **currently weak but are likely to persist**.

Definition of climate fingerprint:

- Economist would conclude that climate change was important if it were principally responsible for a high proportion of current biotic changes.
  
  - By this criterion, a climate fingerprint appears weak
  
  - Most short-term local changes are not caused by climate change but by land-use change and by natural fluctuations in the abunmdance and distribution of species.
  
  - This approach ignores small systematic trends tht may become important in the longer term. But they could be confounded by strong forces such as habitat loss.

For range bounderies, their meta-analysis showed that the range limits of species have moved on average 6.1km/decade. 

For phenology, there was shift towards earlier spring timing of 2.3 days/decade for herbs, shrubs, trees, birds, butterflies and amphibians. 

They assessed phenology for 677 species over a time of 16-132 years. 27% showed no trends in phenology, 9% trend toward delayed spring events and 62% towards spring advancement. 

Increased CO2 can directly cause earlier flowering as does increased temperature, making these effects difficult to separate. *Is that still true?*

Climate and extreme weather events are mechanistically linked to body size, individual fitness and population dynamics for diverse species. 

### 18 October 2024

###### Methods of Dendrochronology: Applications in the Environmental Sciences

**Permanent note:**

METHODS

At the start of the research project, there is a search phase. At this stage, the optimum information should be obtained with the least effort. The first features of the core that are easy to identify are:

- Mean ring width

- Sensitivity (i.e. frequency of visually recognizable signatures or pointer years)

- Frequency and date of abrupt changesin ring width 

- Rot, wounds, compression wood. 

Definition of dendroecology: determination of teh year-by-year interplay of realtionships among climate, site conditions, and tree growth to assess exogenous and endogenous factors taht influence the growth of a plant community

Once the surface is prepared, it may be cross-dated first or measured first, then cross-dated using the measured ring width.

Simple orbital or rotary sanding tools using a range of grit size from 280 to 600 are satisfactory.  Don't overheat the wood and wear mask as the dust from hardwood is linked with cancer. 

### 21 October 2024

###### Declining global warming effects on the phenology of spring leaf unfolding

**Permanent note:**

Phenology of spring leaf unfolding influences regional and hemispheric-scale carbon balances, the long-term distribution of tree species, and plant-animal interactions. 

The extent at which leaf unfolding will respond to climate change is uncertain because the underlying mechanisms respond to environmental stimuli are still not well understood. 

There are still debates regarding the linearity of leaf unfolding in response to climate warming. 

They used pheno data from 1245 sites for sevent dominant tree species in Europe using mature trees. 

They showed VERY interesting results. The leaf unfolding decreased in response to climate change. Three hypothesis:

1. Adaptation to increased variance in spring temperature
   
   1. Possible effects of increased variance in temperature. Trees may develop conservative strategies (or higher phenological plasticity) of spring leaf unfolding in places where temperatures fluctuates more. E.g. to avoid spring frost damage. 

2. Photoperiodic limitations (due to earlier leaf unfolding) overrding temperature controls

Early leaf unfolding in warm springs increase the risk of late frost events for trees. To overcome this risk during warm springs, many species have evolved a protective mechanism related to photoperiod. This prevents the warming response when the days are still short and the risk for subsequent frost events is thus high.

Change in the relationship between chilling accumulation and heat requirement due to shortening days as warming advances leaf unfolding. However, they didn't observe changes in leaf unfolding with latitude neither across species nor individual species, as one could experct if photoperiod was a strong co-limitation of leaf unfolding.

They hve no evidence to exclude photoperiod as a controlling mechanism for the decline in spring unfolding as different popultations may have different genetic adaptaions to photoperiod.

In addition, the lack of relationship between spring unfolding and latitude may have been because the response of spring phenology to photoperiod can be associated with a lot of confounding factors:

- Tree age

- Successional niche

- Xylem anatomy

- Chilling conditions.

Therefore, they couldn't conclude that photoperioid did not influence leaf unfolding, but how it might directly or indirectly affect spring phenology still remains unclear and is currently under debate.

3. Reduced duration and/or sum of cold temperatures during dormancy i.e. a lost chilling mechanism.

Boreal and temperate trees require a certain amount of heat after they come out of the rest period to initiate leaf unfolding in spring. Heat requirement is met sooner in warm springs. However, heat requirement is negatively correlated with chilling (accumulation of cold temperatures during the dormancy period. As the dormancy period warming during the study period, the accumulated chilling is progressibely reduced, thereby increasing the heat requirement ans slowing the advance of leaf unfolding.  They tested this by calculating the accumulation of chilling (sum of days when air temp was between 0 and 5). They found a significant decrease in chilling accumulation for all species. 

Effects of changes in spring phenology on global carbon cycling: extension of GS can increase the photosynthetic production of forests by 0.5-1%/day.

###### Ecological responses to recent climate change

**Permanent note:

Long-term phenological data sets for birds, butterflies and wild plants have been collected because of the easiness of species ID. Pheno trends show earlier breeding or first singning of birds, earlier arrival of migrant birdsd, earlier appearance of butterflies, earlier choruses and spawning in amphibvians and earlier shooting and flowering of plants. 

Less pronounced changes for autumn phenology.

In contrast with the climatic factors controlling autumn phenology, climate signal for phenology are well understood: all phenophases correlate with spring temperatures in the preceding months. 

Earlier leaf unfolding  generates a longer growing season, but also increase the risk of damage by a late frost.

Climatic regimes influence species distributions ofen through species-specific physiological trescholds of temperature and precipitation tolereance. These climate envelopes shift toward the poles or higher altitudes. 

On invasion and climate change: species with different histories of introduction spread *en masse* during periods of climatic amelioration. 

###### Land surface phenology as indicator of global terrestrial ecosystem dynamics: A systematic review

**Permanent note:

Increase in the length of the growing season favorurs increase in net primary production (NPP) resulting in increase CO2 absorption and potentially contribute to reduction of atmospheric greenhouse gasses. It can also have negative effects. Piao et al. 2008 showed longer and warmer autum phenophases increased respiration thus leading to an increase in the amount of CO2 released to the atmosphere.

Longer growing season may also decreasedn albedo as greater amount of surface vegetation exists, which may lead to increased warming of surface due to incresed solar energy absorption vegetation.

Changes in the biological cycle of plants may alter species itneractions (e.g. plant-pollinator interaction), afecting their ecological relationship -->biodiversity loss. therefore, pheno dynamics are extremely important in understanding behavioural responses of the earth' ecostems in the face of clim change.

Phenological changes may influence processes related to wood growth and could have an effect on the timber industry -->Delpierre et al., 2016; He et al., 2018)

LINKS WITH *A Review of Vegetation Phenological Metrics Extraction Using Time-Series, Multispectral Satellite Data*

**Land surface phenology LSP**, which referes to vegetation phenology derived from satellite data is generally estimated based on **vegetation indices** VI (i.e. a combination of spectral values primarily derived from the red and near-infrared (NIR) regions of the electromagnetic spectrum) or **biophysical variables**

BI or biophysical variables time series can be used to study phenophases and obtain specific phenological metrics :**phenometrics** (Def: ecologically-meaningful metrics based on functional analysis from satellite-derived vegetation indices (or satellite-derived biophysical variables). These include the start of the growing season (SOS), the end of the growing season (EOS) and the length of the growing season, which could be considered as a proxy of timing of phenophases.)

LSP studies since the 1980s showed earlier spring and delayed autumn phenophases as general trends. Athough, these trends were associated mainly to changes in temeprature adn precipitation. Pheno cycle dynamics might be related to other drivers, such as photoperiod, soil moisture or organic carbon content. 

###### Large-scale variations in the vegetation growing season and annual cycle of atmospheric CO2 at high northern latitudes from 1950 to 2011

**Permanent note:**

Northern ecosytems have experienced the largest warming rates on the globe. In these regions, phenology controls the seasonal onset adn ending of the carbon uptake period, thereby directly affecting net ecosystem carbon balanece. 

Extension of GS in autumn prolongs photosyntesis in some vegetation types despite decreasing radiation levels. However, the net impacts on seasonal ecosystem balance is not always positive as soil respiration tends to increase more than photosynthesis. 

###### Leaf-out phenology of temperate woody plants: from trees to ecosystems

NOT DONE

**Permanent note:**

Within temperate plant communities, trees and shrubs vary widely in leaf-out times, both among and within species. It can also vary with individuals in different microhabitats within one population. E.e. sugar masple seedlings growing in the understory will leaf out earlier than adults in the canopy, taking advantage of the light availabillity. 

Photoperiod:

Not all species respond to photoperiod cues and not all populations of a species have the same requirements. 

Populations of a given species often have differing photoperiodic requirements across a latitudinal gradient, which are known as photoperiod ecotypes. Lots of long-lived trees rely on a combination of photoperiod and temperature to break dormancy. 

Many early successional oppotunistic species such as birches, poplars don't have a photoperiod requirement to break dormancy, but do have chilling requirements. 

Differences in stem anatomy could explain why some co-existing species leaf-out at different times. Diffuse porous species, those that produce small vessel elements throughout the growing season, tend to loeaf-out earlier in teh spring e.g. maples, birches, alders and poplars. Their small vessel elements are less susceptible to embolism during the winter, which allows them to begin to meet demands of transpiration earlier in the growing season. 

Ring porous species, such as oaks, ashes and hickories have less uniform vessel elements, producing larger vessels in the spring and smaller ones later in the growing seaon. These will be more susceptible to winter freeze which leads to later leaf-out.  However, there are a lot of exceptions to these rules. 

Another factor that influences the timing of leaf out is the amount of **genetic diversity **of a species. Species with low genetic diversity have far more limited variation in budburst dates across a region than those species with high diversity. 



### 25 October 2024

###### Leaf-out phenology of temperate woody plants: from trees to ecosystems

Another theory to explain differences in leaf-out timing among species is evolutionary response to herbivory pressures. Study case: 2 co-occuring varieties of English oak (Quercus robur), one variety leafs-out as much as 5 wks earlier than the other, but sufferes more from herbivory damage. That suggests the opportunity cost of losing more than 1 month of photosynthesis is offset by decrease in foliar damage. See Wesolowski & Rowinski, 2008

While a more universal protocol for monitoring leaf-out would be helpful, Parmesan 2007 found that quantification of changes in leaf-out timing have been found to be quite robust across studies despite methodological differences. 

Earlier leaf-out increases the risk of spring frost. e.g. in 2007 Eastern NA, there was warm weather in March=leaf-out. Subsequent freezing temperatures in early April caused the young leaves and flowers of woody plants to sufffer from frost damage. Immediate result: dieback of youg growth. The damage differed among species depending at which individual developement stage. Plants undergoing leaf elongation suffered much more than those that were just budbursting their buds. Species that burst their leaf buds early but develop slowly were less vulnerable to the late frost than plants with early budburst and quick leaf developement. Species with late budburst and quick developement of leaves also suffered high damage. 

Phenology is a heritable trait with high variability withing species and populations. This suggests that plants may be able to undergo genetic changes in response to new conditions over the course of several generations. (Chuine 2010). Leafing phenology is also highly plastic, allowing plants to survive variabilkity in weather conditions. 

Phenology and ecosystem processes. When trees leaf-out, canopy trees alter water and light environments of coexisting organisms. Earlier leaf-out leads to the canoppy interecepting more of the incoming radiation and precipitation. These reduce throughfall, soil weater and soil evaporation. 

It also has strong controls over rates of water uptake by trees. Reduces light and water for plant understory. Can be quite negative. 

Earlier onset of spring did result in increase of carbon sequestered in deciduous forests and to a lesser extent, coniferous forest. 

Cool picture of how vegetative phenology can affect physiological activity. 

Species don't all respond to changing temperature in the same way and there is a wide variation nin leaf-out timing as a result of different control mechanisms. *link this to a previous note above.*



###### Phenology Under Global Warming

**Permanent note:**

Christian Körner

Spring events at temperate latittudes have advanced by 2.5 days per decade since 1971 : A. Menzel et al., Glob. Change Biol. 12, 1969 (2006).

The three most important factors controlling phenology in dominant forest tree species are the degree of winter chilling, photoperiod and temperature. A lack of sufficient chilling in mild winters delays bud break. However, it may be partially replaced by long photoperiods and or very high temperatures. 

Not all tree species are sensitive to photoperiodm, but the long-lived, late successional species that become dominant in mature forests commonly are. Shorter lived-early successional species adopt are more risky life strategy. Poplars, birch are usually oppotunistic i.e. photoperiod insensitive in spring. 

Oppotunistic taxa may profit from a warmer climate and may thus gain a competitve advantage over photoperiod-sensitive taxa. 

###### Photoperiod constraints on tree phenology, performance and migration in a warming world

**Permanent note:**

Way, Danielle

Warming will not be distributed equally across the globe. Higher latitude regions will warm more than equatorial regions, with mean annual temperatures in artic regions predicted to warm by 8.3C and summer temperatures in broeal regions by 6C by the highest emission scenario by 2100 

Warming experiments show that increased temperature will affect tree growth with direct effects on plant physiology. These effects are positive fro deciduous species and negative for evergreen. 

Longer GS could increase forest productivity or offset reductions in mid-summer carbon uptake caused by increasing heat and drought stress. 

Potential asynchrony between photoperiod and temperature. E.g. as the climate warms at a specific location, the day of year when the risk of spring frost ceases or autumn frost appears will have a shorter photoperiod than it currently does. 

There is considerable evidence that photoperiod is the dominant cue for growth cessation and bud set in many temperate and boreal trees. Temperature has been shown to impact these processess in some species. Bud set represents a major shift in developmental pathways that starts the process of dormancy induction prior to winter. 

Photoperiodic control of growth cessation and bud set comes from provenance trials. E.g. balsam poplar populations have showed important divergence in bud set when grown in a common garden. This suggests strong selection for this phenological trait (neutral processes).

Phenotypic variance in budset is strongly related to provenance, with northen populations setting bud earlier than southern ones, consistent with the role of photoperiod as a major control on bud set. 

Generally, trees from lower altitudes have shorter critical photoperiod to induce growth cessation or budset. Thus, if moved poleward, they set bud later and achieve higher growth than local genotypes. Similarly, when populations are moved toward equator they set bud and cesase growth earlier as they have longer critical photoperiods. 

Cool table about photoperiod sensitivity.  
